Hey there, Hitesh here and welcome
to another video of Python learning.
Now, this video, or from this video
onwards we start another section.
I know the video is still
in the section of the Udemy,
but so far what we have studied
are immutable sections.
That means they cannot be changed
once the memory reference
is done, that is means it's
done, it cannot be changed.
Yes, you can create the fresh
one and have a reference
of it, just like number two is
being changed to number three.
Surely that can be done.
But the whole goal is once
a memory reference is done,
it cannot be changed.
It gets a unique id.
That unique ID never changes that.
Now there are other type of things
as well, data types which are known
as mutable, they can be changed
and that's exactly what we're going
to study from here onwards.
There are not much of them, but yes,
a lot more methods exist of them,
a lot more functionality exist
on them because they can be changed.
So there can be append method,
there can be insert method.
A lot of them exist
just because they are mutable.
That's what we are going
to study and I highly request
you that please do review us.
We want to make it world's
best Python course.
We are working really hard
on it and your support will
help us to make that.
Let's go onto the screen
and discuss about this.
So let's talk about them.
So there are mutables and there
are immutables as well.
We are going to the mutable or
journey now first let's write that.
That would be super fun
to write actually.
So this one that you have is mutable.
There we go.
So the first sequence that we're
going to study in the mutable
data type is going to be list.
Now list has variety of name.
I'll call this some, list
but you will find as an alternate
name or the neighbor cousin
in another language known as array.
We don't call it as an array
in the world of Python we call
it as list but treatment.
The defining way the data structure
is exactly same, there is no
difference between the list
and the array and we can actually
mix and match things into it.
And that's it, that is it.
We can reorder them, change
them because they are mutable.
I think let's go ahead
and talk about them.
I think rest can be discussed
on the code editor, which is better.
All right, so let's close
all of this and another
chapter in the data type.
Look at this, how many
chapters we are going for.
Too many.
Chapter 8 Py.
There we go.
So what is this list?
Let's just say I want
to call ingredients.
I sometimes have a tough time
in spelling it out.
Hopefully I did a correct job.
Ingredients shouldn't have used that.
But anyways we have to because that's
the ingredients of making a good T.
Let's just say we have water
and what do we have?
Milk.
I don't prefer milk in my T.
But still I will consider this.
And let's just say we
have a black T as well.
These are my ingredients.
Now let's just say this
is what we have defined.
That is it.
That's what we want to have.
And I'll focus up here.
Now let's just say you
forgot to add sugar.
So what we are going to do if it
would be tuple, I had no choice.
I had to come up here and add it
here because once it is defined,
I cannot change it throughout
the lifecycle of a program.
But in the world of mutable
sequences and mutable data
types, that's not the case.
I can just go ahead and say
hey, ingredients, I want
to add one more thing.
That means I want to append it.
Append will add it
at the very end of it.
What do you want to append?
I want to add sugar,
or append sugar into this one.
That is it.
And let's just say
let's print it first because I
think that would be fun.
So printing a formatted string.
And I would say ingredients are.
And then we can use a variable here.
There we go.
So we are printing it up now.
Not only just we can add things,
we can remove the things as well.
I don't know who would love
to remove it, but let's just say
I want to remove the water.
So all I do is put up a dot and I
can see all the method that are
available here for me to use
in this list or in the sequence.
So append, clear, count,
extend, index.
Now obviously nobody can teach
you all this because
the better way to learn about them
is via implementation.
But again most of them make sense.
Like we have count, it is going to
count how many elements are there.
Similarly we have
one known as remove.
So this is what we want
to use and just mention what
do you want to remove.
So I want to remove
water from this one.
If it will be available,
it will be removed no matter
what the position is.
So let's just say we are saying,
we have the boiling water,
we don't need this so we
can just work like this.
And I will just like to print this.
Let's see what happened.
All right, so this time,
this is chapter eight.
We run this and we can see that
we have water, milk,
black T and sugar is being added.
Because we have printed this
after adding the sugar
and then we are printing this one.
So again, doesn't really matter
if it is at the very start end.
It will just find it
and will remove it.
There are a lot of methods available
in the world of list.
Let's try some of them.
I think the best way is
to learn them on the go.
But let's just say we want
to have some practice on this.
I will say I have ginger.
I usually go first
for the ginger, always.
And then we have, cardamom.
Hopefully I wrote it correct.
Yeah, looks good.
So let's just say we want to have
another ingredients for chai.
So these are my spice options,
and these are my chai ingredients.
And, the chai ingredients are
water and milk.
That's it.
Water and we got milk.
There we go.
Now, first of all, what we want to do
is we want to add spice to our chai.
So how I can do that, the easiest
way is chai ingredients
can actually extend
to an existing list just by this.
And I can say spice options.
Pretty easy.
What's the output?
Yeah, that's a good question.
So I would love to just directly
print it without any formality.
I will just say, chai
and I will say chai ingredients.
Let's go ahead and print it out.
There we go.
And as you can see, we have chai
and we have water, milk, ginger.
So all of this is combined.
This is one of the common way that
you might want to combine two
of the list and stuff like that.
There is another interesting stuff.
As you can see right now we have,
this is known as 0th position.
So on the 0th position we have
water, then we have milk.
So let me just copy this
and bring it onto our board.
So there we go.
So this is whole how
a list looks like.
And always remember that you
have the 0 position first.
So who is at 0 position?
Always remember
that water is at 0 position.
Come on.
Can you point this?
Yeah, there we go.
And then similar to this, we
have position number one
and one position is milk.
Super easy.
Not too tough.
So let's just say on a certain
specific position, you want to add
something and you know the position
where it's going to be.
It's super easy.
I Can just go ahead and call
the chai ingredients and use
the method insert appends always
adds it at the very end of it.
But insert.
You have to provide what
position you want to add.
This position is known as index.
You're going to see this
index quite a lot.
So let's just say my
index or my position is number two.
And I want to add something
like black T here.
Black T, where it will
go ahead and add it.
So since this is my zero position,
this is my one position.
And I know that ginger is
at position number two.
And I have asked something to add
in the position of the two.
So obviously these things
will move towards the right.
Let's see if we are
actually correct or not.
Let's go ahead and use this quick
keyboard shortcuts always help.
So we can see that we have
the water, milk and black T is
at position number two now.
And obviously the ginger
and cardamom got shifted.
So this is what happens when we
go ahead and work like this.
So I'll just copy this
for you to compare.
And I think I should add it up here.
And there we go.
So we still have the water and milk.
So water is still at a position zero.
Milk is still at a position one.
But this time the position
two is for black T.
And there we go.
So this is how the basics
of it, how it works.
And in the world of list there are
some more details just like this.
Usually this is the important part.
But yes, there are other stuff that
exists and I would love to show you.
So let me show you some
of the more methods that you can use
in the list.
And let's carry that on.
Okay, we have inserted the list.
Let me show you that how
we can remove something.
Yeah.
From a particular position
that would be good to have.
So I would say that,
let's pop something.
So let's just say last added.
This is the value.
And I will use chai ingredients
and I can use a method pop.
Now what this pop actually does
whatever is
the last element we have.
So in this case we
have this cardamom.
It will remove it from the list
as well as it will give it to
you back so that you can
actually use it into a variable
and just use it wherever you
like, but it's emptied out from
the list itself.
Let me go ahead and show you
what we have in the last added
so that you can see it.
And there we go.
Let's run this.
And what we see is cardamom.
So cardamom is now removed
from the list.
If I just go ahead and print this
list again at the very end
of it, I know there's a lot
of printing that is.
Oops.
There's a lot of printing
that is going on.
But that's okay.
So we see that the cardamom
is here, but cardamom is gone
from the list itself.
And that's the whole point
of having the pop here.
Now we have another thing which
is pretty fun is I'll show you
directly in the print statement.
I think that is also possible
and doable and it's actually fun.
I can store that into
a variable as well.
But I can use directly a method
known as reverse here.
And again it's a method, it needs
to execute immediately.
Now if I try, obviously
will reverse the list.
Not like each word will be reversed,
but whole list will be reversed.
So didn't worked out well.
So we have to actually
it doesn't return you anything.
That's why it's saying none here.
Because it doesn't return anything
in order to do.
So I have to actually copy this
and have to execute this
because this is mutable.
That means list do get changed.
So I have to say chai
ingredients reverse.
So whatever the value is,
we have reversed that.
And now if I print this up, it has
actually changed my list entirely.
Let's run this again so we can see.
Previously it was water,
milk, black T and ginger.
Now we have ginger,
black T, milk and water.
So each position is being reversed.
Pretty nice.
Pretty interesting.
Okay, we can also do some kind
of a sorting as well.
And for sorting as well I have
to use the same method.
Oops.
And I have to say
that I want to sort.
That's it.
And now we can actually
print this again.
So notice here we have reversed it.
Now we are sorting it.
And again these are very
interesting examples.
And again they take little bit time
to digest, but that's okay.
So we have B as a black T,
then we have G as a ginger, then
Then W for water.
Pretty interesting.
Pretty nice.
Pretty going good.
So pretty interesting stuff.
But what I say is this method doesn't
make sense as of now too much that
hey, why would I reverse this?
Why would I sort this?
If I had to reverse, I would have
written this in that order.
But yes, there are some points,
there are some times like when
you see the buttons which says
sort the items from price low to
high or low to high, when you
actually make real world
application, they're much easier
to connect with.
So I say Just remember them.
Don't sweat it out too much.
That is totally okay.
Now let me show you one.
Another interesting example.
Let's just say we have a variable
that calls as, sugar levels.
Each T shop should have sugar levels.
So we have 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
I don't know who drinks that
much of sugar, but maybe,
maybe there are people.
So I'll just go ahead and print
the stuff like this.
I'll format this and what I
can use is I can find out what
is the maximum out of it.
So maximum sugar level.
And again, as I say, you might be
thinking, hey, I know already
what the maximum sugar level is.
It's five.
But sometimes in the program you
are not aware of this array,
this might be coming up from the
database and you only want to
show the maximum item with the
highest pricing or something
like that.
So in that case you can
actually go ahead and use
the function known as max.
Yes, this exists directly
and you can pass the list to it.
So for example, our
list is sugar level.
So this will give me whatever
the maximum value of this is.
Pretty easy, pretty fun to work with.
So maximum sugar level is 5.
And just like this, we do
have a minimum as well.
So in case I want to find minimum
and you guessed it right, just
like this is max, we do have min.
So yeah, no surprise there.
We have the maximum sugar level.
We have the minimum sugar level.
Pretty easy, pretty fun to run.
Now there is one couple of more
things I want to discuss this.
And again, I'm not in a hurry.
That's why I say my lectures are
little bit longer, but they are fun.
Usually people prefer
to break these lectures into
two parts or three parts.
I think we are also running
a little bit higher on the time.
So instead of this, let's go
ahead and start this video
right here and I will show you
two more things and let's
discuss them in the next video.